Why colds are so contagious


We’ve all been there... coughing and sneezing uncontrollably, laying in our beds at night unable to sleep all because of some microscopic, unperceivable, and seemingly inevitable organism. 'Acute Coryza' or 'Rhino Pharyngitis' (commonly known as rhino virus) is the scientific term used to classify these tiny pathogens that wreak havoc on your immune system. But what makes them so common? Why is there no vaccine? Why is there no cure? By the end of my short explanation you’ll understand why the common cold is so common.

The common cold is caused by rhinoviruses (and coronaviruses), which are viruses that mutate extremely often, making it hard for our immune system to detect and eliminate the virus. Thus, allowing the slightly changed virus to infect the same single individual multiple times. This brings us to our first point on how these sneaky nuisances infect so many of us: rapid mutation; The viruses that cause the common cold all have this trait, allowing them to resist any attempts at using antibiotics or even being able to adapt antibodies against them.

Firstly, common colds are not affected by antibiotics. But what makes them invulnerable to the things that affect all living cells? It’s not called an antibiotic for nothing. (Anti meaning against and biotic meaning living) Due to its unstable nature and natural selection, common colds and other viruses are become immune to antibiotics. Well, how does it work? Picture this: we have two viruses, which start multiplying until our body realizes that we have potentially harmful intruders. Then, our body starts to fight the virus by sending different cells like macrophages (a type of white blood cells) and the victim begins to experience the nasty symptoms caused by your body trying to fight the pesky intruders, more commonly known as a cold. Feeling the effects of the pathogen, we take antibiotics to help fight against the virus. Alas, the virus mutates, and even though some are killed, they mutate so fast that there are some viruses that become immune to that antibiotic. The resistant strains survive and pass the immunity to the next generation, making that strain invincible to that antibiotic. When the virus mutates, our body no longer recognizes the pathogen, leaving us susceptible to the same virus again. 

But the thing is: it’s not actually the same virus. There are millions of different strains that are categorized as the common cold (a catch-all phrase destined to mean a stuffy nose) which can be caused by a myriad of different organisms. Rhino Virus is just one of the ones we know, who is responsible for between 30% and 80% of the infections in a season, and included on the that list is the flu, commonly confused for the cold. The thing is, the common cold is just a catch-all that describes how your body fights off infection, which kind of explains why the cold is so common.

Even if the common cold is extremely, well, common, there are many ways to reduce your chances of contracting it. But, going outside when it is cold does not, I repeat, does NOT make you get a cold (although it does lower your immunity to it and takes longer to recover from it), contrary to popular belief. The only way to become infected with the viruses is to come into contact with the virus itself. During the winter season, many people tend to stay indoors, allowing the pathogen to spread more effectively, which may be a reason why people think that the common cold is caused by the cold temperatures. Myth busted!

Finally, the common cold affects the respiratory system, allowing them to be extremely quick when spreading to other humans. Particles from sneezes travel at approx. 100mph / 161 kmph, so bad luck for anyone caught in its blast radius. We all breathe, and when we all breathe the same air, it’s bound to get contaminated.

Finally, we have reached the conclusion of this conjecture on why colds are so contagious, but, if you think about it enough, the viruses that cause the common cold are just organisms that are trying to survive in our world. They keep alive by multiplying in their hosts (us) and we try to kill them for it (successfully too). However, the cold actually helps us by acting as a training ground for our immune systems, allowing most of us to combat other diseases with more ease. There are proposals to eliminate the common cold, but my stance is, why? For no other reason, colds play an important, if unknown role in our world, it’s going to be unnecessarily expensive, and all it takes is one person to ruin it. Perhaps, the common cold is just going to be one of the annoyances we’ll have to deal with. 
