Why does Helium make your voice high-pitched?

Helium is found in party items such as balloons, and we know Helium, when inhaled, drastically increases the pitch of people's’ voices, resulting in a prank that is sure to come up in parties. Most people who actually use Helium to for this trick have no idea why it works! Well, after reading this short explanation, you’ll add another bit of knowledge to your brain, and perhaps, with some luck, you’ll be able to bring this up in a conversation and sound like the smartest person alive (only a little exaggerated)

First things first; we have to understand how noise escapes our mouths. In our throat, there are two flaps of skin (technically mucous membranes) that relax when we breathe, allowing the air to flow into our lungs. They contract when we attempt to speak. When this membrane is contracted, the airflow is restricted and begin to make the membrane vibrate from between 200 to 2200 times per second (very much like how any instrument works), which, in turn creates sound. By varying the “tightness” of the membrane, we can control the pitch of the sound that is necessary for communication.

Now you might be asking: “But, what does that have to do with anything?” Well, I’m about to tell you right now. The density of the air that passes through our vocal cords also changes the pitch of the sound. You can compare it to viscosity; it is much harder for toothpaste to flow through a tube than water. Contracting your mucous membrane increases air resistance which decreases pitch and the higher the density, the higher the resistance and therefore, the pitch will decrease. The “average air” density is 1.225 kg/m3 (composed of mostly nitrogen and oxygen) and gaseous helium is much lighter, coming in at around 0.164 kg/m3.

Now, we can easily see how helium increases the pitch of people’s voices. But, this stirs up a new question: if hydrogen is lighter than helium and hydrogen is much more common in the universe, why don’t we use hydrogen? If we pull a periodic table out of the internet (it’s the 21st  century) we can see that helium falls under the noble gases, meaning that helium is a very stable element, also meaning that it is fairly safe to use it. Hydrogen on the other hand is not stable and must bind to another element to keep it chemically satisfied like all the other Alkali Metals. To keep the hydrogen lighter than our helium, we only have one possible combination: H2  or hydrogen gas. Hydrogen gas is HIGHLY flammable, meaning that it could literally spontaneously combust. Hopefully, I need not say more and you understand why we don’t allow children to handle pure hydrogen.
(Editor’s Note: Please do not waste helium attempting to do this, although it is the second most common element in the Universe, because of its density it escapes Earth’s Atmosphere and we don’t have a good supply of it, and we need that supply for Medical Instruments like MRI Machines. That was a long Editor’s note; Goodbye Gentlemen.)
