Recently, I’ve learnt how to do pyrography and I made 4 pieces of artwork. Now, if you don’t know what I’m talking about, pyrography is like burning wood to make an image. 


Here’s what I made:


<Pic 1>    <Pic 2>   <Pic 3> …


        I had lots of fun making these pieces and I would like to share with all you guys how to make your own artwork from wood and hopefully, you’ll be able to gain some respect from your friends and family!


        Firstly, you’ll want to gather your supplies from your nearby hardware store. You’ll need some wood (which we’ll talk about later), paper, pencils, and a soldering iron (preferably with multiple tips and adjustable temperatures). Optionally, you can also bring a fine chisel, sandpaper, wood stain, and a brush.


        Of course, the next thing you’ll want to do is to have an idea of what you want to make. Personally, I know that sometimes the ideas don’t come quickly and it can be a bit hard to get started on something so we have something called the internet! Search for pictures and photos to become inspired and grab a pencil and paper to start a rough sketch of your picture.


        Once finished, you should start preparing your wood. I recommend pine for starters but the type of wood really depends on what kind of style you are aiming for; softer wood for darker and deeper burns (watch out for when the burn “seeps” out of the crack) and harder wood for lighter burns. I made mine with pine. Cut your wood to an appropriate size and always remember to sand off the edges to prevent splinters and just to give it a slightly more finished look.


        Next, transfer your image onto your wood using a pencil. Make sure you can see your marks clearly and if you cannot, use a softer tip to increase the darkness of the marks on the wood. If you feel like you cannot replicate the image, you can use carbon paper to transfer the image. Alternatively, you can press down hard on your image with a fairly sharp object to make marks on your wood, but be warned, if you make a mistake using the sharp object, you will most likely not be able to get the mark off.


        It’s time for the fun part! In an area with good ventilation, (the sap can be poisonous when burned) plug your soldering iron in and trace your lines with varying amounts of force and temperatures. After some hard work and dedication, you’ll be able to get your outline done! Congrats! Now, the next thing to do is to shade your image. There are many ways to do this; you can cross-hatch, give a smooth shade with a flat soldering bit, or make a lot of dots (I forgot the terminology). Remember: everything you do now is FINAL, there is not much you can do if you mess up. If you’re lucky, the part that needs to be erased is a bit of superficial shading and you can gently use the sandpaper to sand out the burnt parts.
        Now that you have your picture completed, you can use stain and a brush to polish your work. The stain can also be poisonous so you may want to take a break now and then to reduce prolonged exposure.


        You’re done! Step back and examine your beautiful work!!! Even if it didn’t turn out to be what you wanted, I hope you had fun making it and you learned something in the process of creating the artwork.